Lesson Two: Functions and deficiencies symptoms of macro and micro element.

Nitrogen

Functions of Nitrogen
1. it aids plant growth and reproduction
2. it increases the size of grain in cereals 
3. it promotes vegetative and short system growth   
4. it promotes uptake of potassium and phosphorus from the soil
5. it enhances deep-green colour of the plant 

Nitrogen Deficiency Symptoms 
1. Stunted growth 
2. Yellowing of leave (Chlorosis)
3. Dropping of leaves
4. Poor formation of fruits and flowers

Functions of Phosphorus
1. It aids enzyme reaction 
2. It increases crop resistance to diseases
3. It helps in ripening the fruit 
4. It aids fruit formation and maturity
5. It improves the good taste of forages and vegetable

Phosphorus Deficiency Symptoms
1. Leave turn to purple and brownish coloration from the tip backwards
2. Stunted growth     
3. Inhabitation of flowering, fruits and seed formation
4. Poor root development 

Functions of Calcium
1. It strengths the plant cell walls with calcium pectate 
2. It controls the toxicity of aluminum manganese and sodium ions
3. It is necessary for normal growth of root tips
4. It strengthens the plant cell walls
5. It improves the pH of the soil so that nitrogen fixation can be carried out

Calcium Deficiency Symptoms
1. It causes stunting of the root system
2. There is appearance of pale-yellow color in the leave 
3. Weak slender plants 

Functions of Potassium
1. It is an important constituent of plant tissues
2. It aids synthesis of carbohydrate
3. It activates various plant enzyme reaction
4. It promotes the development of young plants
5. It is necessary for neutralization of organic acids in plants

Potassium Deficiency Symptoms
1. Weak slender stems
2. Delayed growth 
3. Premature loss of leaves
4. Brown colour at the margin of leaves 

Functions of Iron
1. It is necessary for chlorophyll formation 
2. It is necessary for protein synthesis contained in chloroplasts formation     
3. It is important in enzyme systems associated with oxidation and reduction reaction     

Iron Deficiency Symptoms
1. Chlorotic condition in leaves, which becomes pale green

Functions of Zinc
1. It is involved in the action of certain enzymes     

Zinc Deficiency Symptoms
1. Production of mottled or extremely small leaves  

Functions of Copper
1. It is a constituent of certain enzymes 
2. It is necessary for photosynthesis
3. It is involved in respiration and utilization of iron 

Copper Deficiency Symptoms
1. Pale green colour of leaves
2. The tips of the older leaves dry-off and die
3. Young leaves tips die back

Functions of Boron
1. It is an important nutrient in protein synthesis
2. It facilitates development of roots
3. It increases yield  

Boron Deficiency Symptoms
1. It causes the death of tips of roots and shoots
2. Failure of flower buds to develop
3. It causes poor growth of plants
4. It causes breaking or lodging  















